---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: A Vast World of Possibilities
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2019-01-17
labels:
  - Software Engineering
---
<center>A Vast World of Possibilities</center>

&nbsp&nbsp;;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Although it has been a decade since I began to write code, my future in software engineering is only beginning.  My love of programming blossomed from a hobby to a side business where I designed and maintained web sites for some of the kiteboarding and watersports companies in areas that I lived.  I found that I enjoyed the entire process of building applications.  I found an outlet for my creativity in the interface design, a challenge to my logical side in the code, and a source of nourishment that sated my hunger for learning.  I quickly realized that I wanted to take programming from the peripheral and move it to the center of my daily life, so I enrolled in a degree program for computer science.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While at the University of Hawaii, I found a job working in the LAVA lab where I was able to use my web design skills in an entirely different way, and this has opened my eyes to a vast world of possibilities.  Using the same languages that I used to develop websites, I created an interactive projection map that incorporates augmented reality.  For the first time, I took the program out of a computer and brought it into the three-dimensional world.  I plan to develop and hone my skills in the field of augmented reality and continue to strive towards creating applications that meld the reality with the digital world.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Still, my goals in software engineering are not limited to data visualization and augmented reality.  I plan to make machine learning and artificial intelligence a second focus of my skill development.  I am fascinated by the idea of algorithms that can learn and the endless possibilities for their use in our world.  Yet I cannot say for sure where I will end up, for it is possible that I have not yet found my greatest passion, and this thought fuels my desire to learn all that I can.</pre>

